reviewers? impartial or paid? biased? from a particular section of soicety?

people are prejudiced against ssmpc? scandal?

are on an average, no of movie goers decreasing? 

The memo basically states that Super Screen should allocate more resources on its advertising budget in order to gather more people to watch their movies. This is based on the premise that fewer people attended the company-produced movies inspite of the percentage of positive reviews going up. For this argument  to be completely correct, a few questions need to be answered to gain a complete perpective of the factirs determining its validity.

Are the reviews by the movie reviewers an accurate representation of the actual public response? In other words, evidence is required to make sure that the reviews are not biased in any way. It may happen that the reviewers represent the perspective of only a particular section of the society that tend to like Super Screen produced movies more than the general population of movie goers. It is also possible that reviewers are biased towards  Super Screen produced movies in general, and tend to inflate its popularity, even when it it may not be the case.
Hence information about the demographic of the movie reviewers is required to assess the situation.

Are the number of people attending movies each year reducing steadily? That is, it may happen that the number of movie goers may have been decreasing for a long time and it was only now that it has reached a crucial point to be noticed. It is possible that with the advent of online and in-home movie streaming services, more and more people are inclined to watch movies at home than to go to a theatre. Hence more information about the statistics of yearly movie goers is required to assess and take appropriate action.

Is the Super Screen Company facing any scandals or any defamatory instances? It may happen that the reputation of the company may have been tarnished by some scandals inside the company, gone public, leading to people avoiding Super Screen produced movies altogether. It may also happen that Super Screen may have made some wrongful claims against some popular personality favoured by many, leading to people boycotting Super Screen movies as a sign of protest. Hence more evidence is required about the past and current standing of Super Screen Company in order to assess what exactly is causing the decreased number of viewers and accordingly atke action.

In conclusion, the argument as it stands is flawed and more evidence as stated above is required to make a proper judgement.

 