The younger generation are being taught a lot of values and important beliefs by the older genertaions in order to propagate their ideals through their novice counterparts. Cooperation is one such value that is vital to the progression of the younger generations especially in the role of leadership: be it in the government, industries or any other fields. The prompt asserts this while also adding that cooperation should be instilling among the younglings, rather than competion. I mostly agree with this manner of thinking as expressed in the following two points.

Cooperation helps leaders to understand their peers, and those working for and/or under them. For example, a fairly younger member of a political party may tend to learn much more from a senior candidate by trying to cooperate with and learn from her than to simply start treating her as a rival and keeping a distance. Further if he converses with his peers and fellow members, he may learn a lot of new ideologies and perspectives of people of his party, which in turn may broaden his perspective; or may even teach him something to which he was oblivious to before. Such knowledge is mostly obtained by cooperating with people form different backgrounds rather than treating everyone as a potential rival and being reticent with them.

Competition tends to desecrate the idea of harmony among people, which in turn becomes the sole thing in mind for many people. For instance, a leader of a medical corporation, being fiercely competititve with his rivals, may refuse to share the formula of their patented life saving drug, for a highly dangerous disease. This tends to do more harm than good for the society, since the drug can now be purchased from only one manufacturer and controls its pricing and supply. Thus a competitive environment may turn out to be qute harmful in many cases.

One may still argue that competition does drive people to be better versions of themseleves. However, this point can prove to be conterproductive. Rivals can become much worse versions of themselves too if they give into spree of competing with each other and trying to push themselevs ahead in the ploitical or industrial race, like violating the enviornmental regulations to boost manufacturing. Hence cooperation is much better.