With more than 8 million users, 1 billion Uber trips and 160,000+ people driving for Uber across 449 cities in 66 countries – Uber is the fastest growing startup standing at the top of its game. Tackling problems like poor transportation infrastructure in some cities, unsatisfactory customer experience, late cars, poor fulfilment, drivers denying to accept credit cards and more –Uber has “eaten the world” in less than 5 years and is a remarkable name to reckon when it comes to solving problems for people in transportation.
If you have ever booked an Uber, you might know how simple the process is –just press a button, set the pickup location, request a car, go for a ride and pay with a click of a button. The process is simple but there is a lot going on behind the scenes. The secret key driving growth of the $51 billion start-up, is the big data it collects and leverages for insightful and intelligent decision making. While Uber moves people around the world without owning any cars, data moves Uber. With the foundation to build the most intelligent company on the planet by completely solving problems for riders –Big Data and Data Science are at the heart of everything Uber does - surge pricing, better cars, detecting fake rides, fake cards, fake ratings, estimating fares and driver ratings.

Matching Algorithms at Uber
Timing is everything at Uber. Given a pickup location, drop off location and time of the day, predictive models developed at Uber predict how long it will take for a driver to cover the distance. Uber has sophisticated routing and matching algorithms that direct cars to people and people to places. Right from the time you open the uber app till you reach your destination, Uber’s routing engine and matching algorithms are hard at work.

Uber follows a supplier pick map matching algorithm where the customer selects the variables associated with a service (in this case Uber app) and makes a match by sending requests to the most optimal list of service providers. Any Uber ride request is first sent to the nearest available Uber driver (the nearest available Uber driver is determined by comparing the customer location with the expected time of arrival of the driver). The Uber driver then accepts or rejects a ride request. This matching algorithm works well for Uber since the transaction is highly commoditized i.e. the number of variables that the customer has to decide before a match is made are minimal.

Fare Estimates
Uber uses a mixture of internal and external data to estimate fares. Uber calculates fares automatically using street traffic data, GPS data and its own algorithms that make alterations based on the time of the journey. It also analyses external data like public transport routes to plan various services.