Like many constructions, it started small. But now thousands of children with autism are making friends and learning social skills by playing a version of online building game Minecraft. Stuart Duncan got the idea through a popular blog he ran about his own experiences with autism as well as bringing up a son with autism. Other parents with autistic children started telling him that their kids were crazy about a game that let them explore a randomly generated wilderness. However, despite loving the game, many of the children were being bullied by other players.

So, in 2013, Duncan, a web developer in Timmins, Canada, set up a server to run a version of Minecraft exclusively for children with autism and their families. He thought the invite-only server would attract 10 or 20 people. To his surprise, hundreds requested to join in the first few days.Now, almost three years later, running “Autcraft” is his full-time job. The community boasts nearly 7000 members, along with a team of admins to help manage its many activities. “Parents see such a benefit for themselves and their children,” says Duncan.

The server caught the eye of Kate Ringland at the University of California, Irvine. She has spent 60 hours inside this virtual world, watching how the kids play and chat to one another. Ringland sees Autcraft as not just another online community, but as a tool that helps autistic children practise social skills. She will present her work at the Human Factors in Computing conference in San Jose, California, next month.

In Minecraft, you manipulate blocks of materials like wood and stone to build whatever you like – from painstaking recreations of cities to simple computers. “This is a great way for them to play a game they love, but also have a social experience,” says Ringland. “It’s giving an alternative way for these kids to express themselves and communicate without the stresses of the physical life stuff.”

Everyday social situations can be challenging for autistic children, who may struggle to pick up on social cues or understand another person’s perspective. Duncan thinks Minecraft strips away the pressures typical of the real world. There is no noisy or unfamiliar environment to distract you, no pressure to track the other person’s facial expressions or worry about eye contact. “With Minecraft, you can really just be yourself,” he says. “The social interactions, the relationships, the communication – everything just boils down to you and your keyboard.”