The Nativity Story, also known as the Christmas Story or the Nativity of Jesus, is a story that tells the conception and birth of Jesus Christ. Throughout the many centuries of Christianity, the Christmas Story has developed into a yearly tradition and is central to the celebration of Christmas in the Christian faith.Mary and Joseph were a married couple living in Nazareth, around 2000 years ago. One night, Mary was visited by the Angel Gabriel (the arch-angel). Gabriel explained that God was to send his son to earth for mankind and that Mary would soon have a baby, that baby would be named Jesus and would be God’s son.

Following the visitation by the angel, Mary told Joseph, and they began to prepare for the birth of their son. Joseph wanted to return to Bethlehem for the birth of their child, so he prepared for the journey.Mary and Joseph sold their goods in Nazareth, taking with them only what they could carry, as well as their donkey. Mary rode on the donkey over the hills of Galilee, and Joseph walked beside her.

The journey would have been long and difficult, travelling through long stretches of desert and harsh landscapes. Eventually, Mary and Joseph would have seen the candlelights of Bethlehem on the horizon.Unfortunately, when Mary and Joseph arrived in Bethlehem, it was incredibly busy. All the rooms at the inns had already been filled. Mary was very pregnant at this time and needed to rest. Luckily, they met a kind innkeeper who let Mary and Joseph stay in his stable for the night.

Mary gave birth to Jesus that night in the stable. She wrapped the newborn baby in a white cloth and lay him to sleep in a manger filled with hay.Whilst Mary and Joseph, and the newborn Jesus, slept in the stable, some shepherds on a hillside that overlooked the city of Bethlehem saw a bright star in the sky. As they watched the bright star hang over the city, an angel came down from the sky and told the shepherds that the Son of God had been born in the city, and they should go to him.

The shepherds left their herds and came down from the hillside to find the newborn baby. They visited Mary, Joseph and Jesus at the stable and knelt before them to pledge their love to the Son of God.Far away in the East, three wise men also saw a bright light in the sky. These wise men were kings from the countries far to the East of Bethlehem. They took the bright star as a sign that a new king had been born, and they began to follow it.

The three wise men followed the star to Jerusalem, where King Herod ruled. They assumed that the new king had been born to Herod. They spoke to Herod and asked to see the child that would be the King of the Jews. This news troubled Herod, who believed himself to be the King of Kings. The wise men left Jerusalem to continue their search.

Eventually, the three kings reached Bethlehem, knelt before the baby and offered gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh. That night, they all shared a dream from an angel. They were warned not to tell King Herod where Jesus was.King Herod only grew more angry when the three kings did not return with news of Jesus’ location. He was worried about being overthrown and ordered his soldiers to go to Bethlehem and kill all the baby boys.

Luckily, Joseph had dreamt of Egypt, and he took Mary and Jesus there, knowing they would be safe from the reach of King Herod.

